INTRO

What is CompTIA A+? 901 and 902

Industry certification administered by Computing Technology Industry Association. Vendor neutral industry organization. Lobby Congress and UN. Administers test. 

Actually two exams taken at computer. 220-901 and 220-902. 

Designed to test entry level technician with around 9 months of experience?

Preparing:


What are exams like?
Computer based multiple choice. Either pass or fail at end. Administed by pearson vue, schedule time, and try to pass. 

Multiple choice or performance based testing? Can be standard multiple choice, multiple choice with schematics or diagrams, or even drag and drop.

Performance based question makes you do something. Have to work with command line or go through windows to get s omething done. Max of 90 questions. 

90 minutes for each exam. 

$199 each. Can get it cheaper. Discount vouchers. Affiliated with school that is a comptia academy. 

Additional Materials:

Practice Tests. Total Tester Product -> his own thing. Maybe check other stuff out. 

AllInOne Comptia A+ 
Managing and Troubleshooting PCs. -> more for classroom. 

TotalSims - exclusively online product. Performance based questions.

What is Covered?

901 - The Hardware Exam? The concept. Who connects to who. 

Objective:
1. Hardware - 34% of Exam
2. Networking - 21 %
3. Mobile Devices - 17%
4. Hardware and Network Troubleshooting - 28%

Go to CompTIA website and download objectives. 

Hardware - Names of connectors on PSU. How many rails on it? What modular means? RAM, is it DDR2, DDR3, What speed, how many pins on connector, is it compatible with motherboard, What kind of motherboard form factor, what is PCI-Express vs old school PCI, what type of socket and what is Intel vs AMD socket. Hard drives, are they SATA, 2.5, 3.5? Video Cards - Resolution, color depth, DVI, HDMI. Monitors, connectors, LED, prints - laser printer, dot matrix, etc. 

Networking - Ethernet, what really is it. Difference between multi-mode and single-mode. Switches, routers. Concentrates on small office or home office networks. Questions on all types of networks. 

Mobile Devices - Mostly laptops. On laptop, what type of ram can be used, how to change it out, what type of screen, etc. Also stuff on mobile OS. Android vs iOS vs Windows Mobile. Difference between tablet and smartphone. Sticks to hardware aspect. 

Hardware and Network Troubleshooting - Takes everything learned from other sections and makes you fix them. 

Software is also on test. 

PC Tech - works with many devices running many different systems. Almost everything interconnects as well and PC tech makes that connection happens. 

Information technology - computing technology plus all the other stuff needed to connect and support computers. 

Network+ - Building maintaining and fixing networks, groups of computers that enable people to share resources, represents a religical set of skills of r computer technicians. 

Microsoft Technical Certifications - Windows controls a huge portion of all installed netowkrs and those need qualified support people to make them run. Shole slew of tracks and exams ranging from specializations in WIdnwos to numerous Microsoft Certified Solution Expert (MCSE) certifications. 

microsoft.com/learning/en-us/default.aspx

Cisco Certification - Cisco routers pretty much run the Internet and most intranets of the world. A router is a networking device that controls and directs the flow of information over netowkrs, such as email, web browsing, and so on. Cisco provides multiple levels of IT certification such as Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA). 
