Garbage Values
object definitions

read two strings:
cin >> first >> second

Operators exactly

CTRL-D is EOF in Unix. CTRL-Z in Windows

If you read system code or machine-generated code, you might see names starting with underscores,
such as _foo. Never write those yourself; such names are reserved for implementation and system
entities. By avoiding leading underscores, you will never find your names clashing with some name
that the implementation generated.

C++ initializations to avoid narrowing conversion. 

The abbreviation I/O stands for “input/output.” In this case, the output from one part of code is the
input for the next part. What such “parts of a program” share is data stored in main memory, on
persistent storage devices (such as disks), or transmitted over network connections. By “parts of a
program” we mean entities such as a function producing a result from a set of input arguments (e.g., a
square root from a floating-point number), a function performing an action on a physical object (e.g.,
a function drawing a line on a screen), or a function modifying some table within the program (e.g., a
function adding a name to a table of customers).
When we say “input” and “output” we generally mean information coming into and out of a
computer, but as you see, we can also use the terms for information given to or produced by a part of a
program. Inputs to a part of a program are often called arguments and outputs from a part of a
program are often called results.By computation we simp

By computation, we mean producting some output from inputs

Constant Expression - an expression with an integer value composed exclusively of constants. Must be given a value that is known at compile time. 
//constant plus literal

Magic constants? - Non-obvious literals in code (outside definitions of symbolic constants) are derisively referred to as magic constants. 

Const handles cases where value of a variable that is initialized with a value that is not known at compile time but never changes after initialization. const is older. 


