Inheritance

Overloading - Creating methods of same name but with different signatures.
Signatures are parameter types. 

void printNumber(int n) {}

void printNumber(float f) {} 

Calls correct function based on type of argument.

Inheritance 

Idea that one class can inherit methods and fields
from other classes. No need to copy code over. 

Overloading
Overriding

Descendant class with inherit from Ancestor class.
Ancestor class is the base class. Inheriting class
is the derived class. 

class Descendant: public Ancestor {

}

public keyword means descendants inherit all public
methods and variables of base class.Except constructor. 

Inheriting doesn't actually grab everything from base class. 
Private variables are not inherited. Must access them from 
public methods.

Derived classes does not inherit base constructors and destructors. 
But derived class is created, compiler creates instances of base
class first and destroys them with derived classes destroyed first 
until base class. Derived class sets off chain of deconstructors

Polymorphism -- means many forms.

Ex. Computer game. Multiple monsters. All can attack. but each attack 
is different depending on the monster. i

Virtual Functions - Tells compiler a function will be used polymorphically

virtual void attack() { }

Compiler selects the appropriate method based on the class of the object
that calls it. 

If enemy class has virtual method attack(). And object extends enemy and 
overrides the attack() method. Then when an object of the derived class
calls attack(), the compiler knows to call that object's implementation
of the attack() method.

Same function but different results. 

If derived class does not override the virtual function but calls a function
of the same name, then it will call the base class's implementation. 

Abstract Classes or Pure Virtual Function - Virtual function that does not 
have a body at all. 

virtual void attack()=0;

Has no implementation at all. Any derived class that inherits a class that 
contains a pure virtual function MUST override that function.

Abstract class is a class that has a pure virtual function in it.  
