TILING

2D Worldbuilding - Tile Map

A 2D tool for making grid based layouts. 

Import Pipeline - 

Art Tool -> Sprites -> Tiles

Tile because wanted intermediate asset that is not a sprite. References sprites. HAs extra data: transform, color. 

Create -> Tile. 

Tile Pallette 

Window -> Tile Pallette

Way to view and manage pallettes of tiles. Collections of tiles. Can be used to paint on tile map of scene. 

Create New Pallette . Give name. 

Dropdown has all tile pallettes created. 

Drag sprites into tile pallette. Generates tile assets.

Can use single sprites or multiple sprites. 

Crate tile map. 

Crate -> 2D Object -> Tile Map

Tile Map gives a grid parent object. That defines cell size and gap between cells. 

Tile Map Renderer - renders tile map;

Can paint. 

Grid can have mutliple tile maps. Floor. Walls. Ordering layer used to sort them. So one drawn in front other

Can have multple grids. Plant Grid. Plants. 

The lower, the later the rendering. Therefore on top. 

Choose tile map.

Choose pain brush. Chooce tile from tile pallette. And then you can paint. 

Box fill - big box full of tile. 

Can use variety. 

Pick many tiles. Use box fill. 

[] - can rotate tiles. 

Colliders. 

For walls? As a box?

TileMapCollider2D - colliders on each tile in the tile map. 

But often you don't want to colide with the entire grid. 

Tile can have collider type. Can give collider type of sprite instead of grid. 

If add TileMap collider2D here to sprite. The collider wil be just on the edges. 

Give physics shape for specific tile to use as collider. That's why only edge matters. 

CompositeCollider2D - so not every tile has colliders. Make suer tilemapcollider2d is being used by composite. Combines collision shape to simplify it. 

When add compositecollider2D want to change rb to static not dynamic. 

Custom Tiles and Custom Brushes. Can extend tile class and make it do interesting things. 

Example: Animation.m

Waterfall

Pipeline - based on what neighbors are. What should change abount tile. 

Use custom scripts. 

RefreshTile() -> make decisions about neighboring tiles. 

TerainTile - has a bunch of rules to do with neighbors in 8 directions. 

Custom Brushes 

Default brush places tile. Colors it white. Etc. 

Basic idea is that want to extend grid brush and override painting actions. 

Want to do something different when paint, box fill, erase, etc. 

Can have tint color and show preview. 

RoboDash. Can learn from this. 
