INTRO

Want to make image small so can manipulate individual pixels. 40 x 40 used in example.

Then zoom. Can click zoom command and drag mouse. 

CHANGING SETTINGS FOR PIXEL ART

Go to preferences

Image Interpolation > Nearest Neighbor (preserve hard edges). Makes it so no anti aliasing occurs. Hard edges remain. 

Use pencil in brush tool. Gives hard, fine line. 

Change size of brush to 1px.

Put eraser in pencil mode. Set size to 1px. 

Fill -> fills in colors matching color
Gradient -> creates gradient between two colors. 

HOTKEYS

V -> grab and move
M -> marquee tool. Make selection
Ctrl-Z -> Undo
Ctl-Alt-Z -> COntinue undoing steps
L -> Lasso tool
B -> Brush/Pencil tool
E -> Eraser tool
G -> Fill/Gradient tool

LAYERS

Go to layer. Bottom right there are icons to add layers. 

CTRL-J -> copy layer

Relabel layers to keep organized

Can also make folders for layer.

Select layers. Hold shift. Then go to folder icon to put in folder. 

CTRL-G -> put layers in folder

Can change layer type. Overlay, vivid light. CHanges how it interacts with other layers.

Opacity -> can edit. 

SHAPES IN ARTWORK

Art comes down to shape. 

Only have so many pixels to convey to viewer what an object is. 

Everything can be broken down into basic shapes. 

When creating diagonal lines, want to make sure there are even spaces between each step. 

Marquee. Grab and hold alt. Cpoies. 

CTRL-T -> right click. Then can flip the selection.

VALUE AND CONTRAST

Value - the light or darkness of a color. Goes from white to dark. 

High contrast is important.

Breaks up different elements of image and adds details.

Shadow value -> darkest

highlight -> lights up design

bounce light -> light being bounced from other surfaces

Outlines -> good for pixel art for defning.o

Only outline inside lines and corners. Do not do inverted corner. When corner points back toward object. Otherwise line is thick.

Can change opacity to lighten outline.

LEARNING COLOR THEORY

Color theory very important in creating artwork. 

Can create contrast

What colors look good togethers. Colors across from each other. 

Color wheel divided into warm and cool.

Want warm and cool mostly. 

Shadows can be a cooler color where outliness are warmer colors. 

INSPIRATION

Google images and pinterest can provide inspiration.

