FONTS

Fonts must be in browser. Can't know whether this is the case.

cssfontstack.com

font-family: Arial;
font-size: 85px;

ems - for picking font size. Relative font size. Dynamic size. Equal to size of font that defines of parent of element in question. 

Top level value of em changes depending on browser. Mostly around 16px. Most people therefore set font-size on body. 

font-weight - how bold or light weight text is. How thick font is. 

font-weight: bold; 

Certain fonts have weights: 100-800 (100, 200, 300, etc, 800)

Line-spacing - spacing between lines

line-height: 2;

text-align - controls how text of given element is aligned

text-align: center;

text-decoration - give text underline, strike through, or overline effect

text-decoration: underline;
text-decoration: line-through;

CUSTOM FONTS

Use other fonts than system fonts that might not be available anyway. 

Can be font owned (purchased or owned by company) or use other resource.

Google-Fonts - hundreds of fonts that can be included

google.com/fonts

Every font and weight included will slow down page.

Can get link or download fonts. Add to html and css. 

The Box Model

Padding, margin, border, and more.

In a document, each element is represented as a rectangular box. In CSS, each of these rectangular boxes is described using standard box model. 

Each box has four edges:
1. margin edge
2. border edge
3. padding edge
4. content edge

Can style different properties in box. 

Margin - from edge of window to padding. Border separates margin and padding. Padding surrounds element, between element and border, margin.

border: 2px solid blue;
border-top: 5px;

width: 50%;

padding:  10px;
padding-left:40px;

margin: 100px; space outside border
margin-top: 500px;

margin: top right bottom left
margin: 20px 40px 500px 100px

margin auto -> centers element

margin: 0 auto 0 auto;

margin: 50px 20px; //adds 50 to top and bottom, 20 to left and right

rem - like em but is relative to the root size

letter-spacing: 2.0rem;

<hr> - line separator element in html
