BOOTSTRAP

Library. Can be downloaded and included locally.

Most popular HTML, CSS, and JS framework for developing, responsive, mobile first projects on web. 

Most starred and forked repository on github. Just a single file of css and js. 

Help makes fast, responsive websites. 

Bootstrap docs - famously good

CSS - things that can be added to website
-buttons (can change colors)
-forms

Components - Basic things can be used
-navbars: many styles
-jumbotron
-progress bars

Can customize these with own styles. Good developers make websites where can't tell bootstrap is used. 

Bootstrap expo - websites that use bootstrap

Can either download files and add them to app locally.

bootstrap.css - most important css file. 
bootstrap.min.css - same file but compressed. 

Just a list of classes. Can then use those classes in own apps.

Other option for installing:

Bootstrap CDN:
Take link and add it to code. Links to hosted version of same files. 

Buttons:

CSS Buttons: can use <a>, <button>, or <input> element

different buttons
different sizes
can set to active

To override styles, override classes

.btn-danger {
	background: orange;
}

FORMS and INPUTS

Jumbotron - lightweight, flexible component that can optionally etend entire viewport to showcase key content on site 

Regular Forms, Inline Forms, and new types of form controls. Different and disabled checkboxes and radio buttons. Dropdowns. 

Focus state - shows focus. 

class="form group" - adds optimum spacing for elements.

Input:

class="form-control" - without it, get basic html with basic focus. 

These classes also important to overall grid system.

Everything boils down to these two classes.

Container - good way to get spacing for website. 

Navbar - responsive and becomes mobile hamburger when compressed. 

Can hold brands, links, inputs, 

Bootstrap criticisms - a little ugly, meaningless. Response to Bootsrap called Semantic UI. Not as widely used though. 

Look at file and docs for how it works. 

THE GRID SYSTEM

Probably main reason people use bootstrap.

Adds structure and layout to website. 

Every container can be divided into 12 different columns. Then can pick how many of those 12 units each element should take up. 

Grids can be nested, so in each col of a grid can be divided into 12 parts

LAYOUTS

4 different sizes that can be specified

xs - mobile
s - tablet
m - laptop?
l - largest

When l switches to medium, want each col to take up 2 units instead, so 2 rows of 6.

<div class="col-md-3 col-sm-6 pink">TOUR DATE</div>

Larger sizes inherit smaller size if not specified. 


NESTING GRIDS  

A grid of rows and columns. Each row can fit 12 columns. Each column can fit multiple rows.

To have bootstrap styled website be responsive on mobile, add following meta tag to <head> before <title>:

<meta nae="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
